Good afternoon and welcome
to the USB Overview session.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm the USB and FireWire
Technology Manager within
Apple's Worldwide
Developer Relations organization.
And I'm pleased to see you here today.
This session will cover some of
the basics of USB on Mac OS X.
Before I bring up the engineers to
have them do their presentation,
I want to talk a little bit about the
things that we like about USB in X and
in general with our Digital Hub strategy.
One of those things is the nature
of powering devices over USB.
More importantly than powering devices,
recharging devices.
So I brought with me here today
A new cable,
this is a USB adapter cable for a Palm 5,
has a sync button in it,
and it charges the Palm 5.
You think about our iBook
commercial we're running where the
gentleman's sitting in the middle
seat and he's playing with all
his neat devices at 35,000 feet.
It wouldn't be too cool if all
those devices required a power
strip on the floor of the plane
with a 110-volt to 12-volt
converter to run all those devices.
So we really want you to look very
carefully at powering your devices
over USB and charging them over USB.
Some devices that are good about
this are things like the Zip Drive,
some of the floppy drives.
They receive power over the USB bus.
They operate without the
need for an AC adapter.
This is a great way to go.
And if you can charge them,
that would be even better.
Now as you know, we've been doing USB for
about four years now.
We've got a lot of experience in it.
We've got some of the best engineers in
the business working on USB for Mac OS X.
We've made great progress.
We know we have more
distance to go on this.
So I want to leave you with a
couple of thoughts with regard to
helping us move forward on USB on X.
The first one is,
please use the bug reporting system.
We do look at those bug
reports very seriously.
Don't assume that we've
seen a bug report.
Don't assume that if
it's happening to you,
we must have seen it and
we must be fixing it.
We want to have those in the database.
We want to be working on them.
We want to know about them.
The other thought that I would share
with you is that we are working very
aggressively on providing updates.
You've watched us produce three
updates in the last 58 days.
We will be doing more.
So if you get your bug reports in,
there's a very good chance we'll
be able to move forward on them.
So with that, I'd like to bring up
Rhodes Hollowell and Dave Ferguson.
Dave is the software engineering
manager for USB development on Mac OS X.
And Rhodes Hollowell is our lead
engineer on USB development.
Thanks very much.
Good morning.
Thank you, Craig.
Well,
what we're going to talk about today
So what you're going to learn in this
session is we're going to go over the
USB hardware architecture as delivered
in Macintosh models that we ship today.
I'll talk a little bit about
where the different ports go,
numbers of controllers,
compatibility with different controllers,
that sort of stuff.
We'll talk about the driver
architecture in Mac OS X,
specifically how it fits in
with I/O Kit and how that
family fits with other families.
We will talk about converting
your Mac OS 9 drivers into 10.
So obviously you have a lot of experience
developing Mac OS 9 USB drivers.
We have a lot of devices
and a lot of drivers.
And so I know that people have
things and they want to get
them converted over to OS X.
And so what's the same, what's different,
what do you need to do to get started?
In doing that,
we'll detail a little bit of
the differences between kernel
mode and user mode drivers.
And we'll talk about what happens today.
When you have classic and you have
support for existing USB drivers,
which USB devices can
be operated in classic?
How do they work?
How does classic and native
OS X drivers work together?
And finally, we'll do a quick review
of Apple's class drivers,
the drivers that we deliver so
you can deliver USB products
that don't have any software
component at all that you need to,
that a user needs to install.
Just drivers that we bring.
So,
universal serial bus hardware has been
included in every Macintosh model since
we introduced the iMac in August of '98.
Today, every single machine that we ship
has two independent USB buses.
Both of those are OHCI,
open host controller
interface compatible.
Our software is compatible
with OHCI controllers,
so in fact, in addition to the two
buses that we are supplying,
it's also possible to install
PCI cards or Cardbus cards that
have OHCI compliant controllers.
And our software will detect those
cards and support the USB bus on that.
Now, other USB hardware that we have
included with every machine
In addition to the two independent buses,
we are also including hubs in both
our monitors as well as the keyboards.
Now, the hubs that are in the monitors
are all self-powered hubs.
They provide more high-power ports,
just like the ports on
the back of a machine.
And the hubs that are in the
keyboards are bus-powered hubs,
so they can only supply the 100
milliamps of power and are useful
for some bus-powered devices,
usually other self-powered devices
that it's just more convenient to
plug them in right on the keyboard.
So controllers,
mice and stuff attached to a keyboard,
other high-powered devices,
we've made it convenient to put ports
on the back or on the sides of monitors.
So let's talk about how the
I/O USB family in Mac OS X fits into
the I/O Kit family architecture.
This slide shows basically
I/O Kit as a large field with
a whole series of families.
We've denoted some of these families
with different colors indicating
the type of family they are.
The I/O USB family is one of these on
the left which is a transport family.
It's one that actually transports
data over some type of bus.
So I/O USB family, Firewire family,
SCSI family are all capable of
transporting data over a specific bus.
Things such as the I/O Serial family,
the SCSI architecture family,
the audio family don't necessarily
have a specific hardware
component associated with them.
They're responsible more for managing
and converting data to transport over
some other family's transport mechanism.
I/O Kit includes a lot more
families than the I/O Kit.
The I/O Kit includes a lot
more families than this.
I'm just trying to give you a
sense of where USB fits into
that family architecture.
Okay, thank you Dave.
So we're going to talk a little bit
about the I/O kernel driver stack.
What happens when the system
detects that USB is present?
So at the very early stage of
USB initialization there is an
I/O PCI device that the system detects
and the PCI family is responsible
for detecting this device and that
device is the USB controller chip.
The USB driver is then matched
against that controller
chip and the name of that,
the class of that driver
is I/O USB controller.
Now this driver then initializes
the USB controller chip and and
instantiates an I/O USB device.
This device represents the root hub.
Inside the controller chip.
So that USB PCI device is then matched
by I/O Kit and it loads another driver.
And the name of that driver
is the Apple USB hub driver.
So this driver loads against
any hub in the system,
including the root hub.
But in the case of the early
initialization of the root hub,
it then scans the bus
looking for USB devices.
So let's say we have a pair of
speakers plugged into this bus.
Well, the I/O USB controller can have
more than one child or client
that it is a provider for.
And so it instantiates
another kernel object,
C++ kernel object, the in I/O Kit called,
that is an I/O USB device
representing these speakers.
There is a driver inside the system
that matches against this device
because it's a composite device.
And that driver is then used to connect
the USB device to the I/O USB hub.
And that driver sets the
configuration inside the device,
which causes the interfaces to appear.
So one of these interfaces is the
audio channel for these speakers.
And so this I/O USB interface appears and
I/O Kit then matches a driver against it.
And in this case, that driver is the
Apple USB audio driver.
So this is just a quick overview of
the stack of the I/O Kit objects.
We will go into some more detail today.
and we will go into even
more detail on this tomorrow.
Now, USB drivers are not
members of the USB family.
They use the USB family for
their transport mechanism,
and so they are clients
of the USB family,
or in other words,
the USB family objects are the
providers for these drivers.
So here, for example,
is that same audio driver,
and its provider is an
I/O USB interface object,
but the driver is itself subclassed
from the I/O Audio Device class,
which is a subclass of I/O Service,
I/O Service being the base
class for all I/O Kit objects,
and so this driver is a
member of the audio family.
and in turn this driver may
have its own clients for what
to do with this audio stream.
Another example would be
the HID interface which then
loads the HID driver which is
a member of the HID family.
We represent this with these puzzle
pieces because there can be a different
HID driver that is a subclass of the
I/O HID device class which uses a
different transport mechanism than USB.
Now, how does the API for
USB in Mac OS X compare
with the API in Mac OS 9?
Well,
many of the function names are similar,
but in fact the API is vastly
different in the respect that in 9
you have a parameter block interface,
whereas in 10 you have a series
of C++ methods that you call
you know, with C++.
So, and also, in 10 -- in 9,
all calls to the API are
asynchronous calls.
You must provide a callback routine,
and everything happens asynchronously.
In 10, there is a capability for making
synchronous calls to the usb stack.
However, you must be careful about
making these synchronous calls,
because it is -- there is a
potential to deadlock the system.
Finally, in 9,
everything is -- all memory buffers are
passed as held and locked memory buffers,
whereas in 10,
it's possible to pass buffers
using an I/O Kit object class
called I/O memory descriptor,
which we will get into
in a little more detail.
Now in the kernel,
the USB family provides three
basic object classes that represent
the contents of a USB device.
These three classes are I/O USB device,
which is an encapsulation, if you will,
of the device descriptor
inside the physical device.
Then there's the I/O USB interface class.
This is an encapsulation of the
interface descriptor within a
particular configuration of the device.
So if a configuration has three
interface descriptors within it,
there will be three I/O USB interface
objects which are created to represent
those three interface descriptors.
Finally, there's the I/O USB pipe object.
This object encapsulates the contents
of an endpoint within an interface
descriptor and it also provides the
channel between the client software
and the endpoint on the device.
From user space,
because Apple recommends that
you write your drivers in
user space if at all possible,
we provide access to these same objects,
but we do them using the
I/O CF plug-in model.
That is part of I/O Kit and
we have two plug-in types
that we provide in user space.
The I/O USB device interface and
the I/O USB interface interface.
Now these names can become a mouthful.
The I/O Kit team decided to call
these plug-ins device interfaces.
And of course in USB there is already
the concept of a device as in a
device descriptor and an interface
as in an interface descriptor.
And so we actually had
device-device interfaces and
interface-device interfaces and
that got to be a little much.
So we called them the
I/O USB device interface and
the I/O USB interface interface.
How do the memory buffers compare?
Well, as I said before, in Mac OS 9,
when you passed a memory buffer to USB,
because it needed to use DMA to
transfer the actual data,
you would have to lock the
memory and make sure that it was
physically held and resident and
pass a pointer to this memory.
In Mac OS X,
this is handled with a concept
called an I/O memory descriptor.
I/O memory descriptors are more flexible
than just straight memory buffers
because they can provide access to memory
that is not necessarily contiguous.
A piece of the memory can be over here,
and then the next piece of
the memory can be over here,
and then another piece
can be somewhere else.
And the memory descriptor
can describe that,
and then the USB engine can then
transfer the data into disk drive.
So, these are all joint buffers.
Also, if you are accessing,
passing the memory in from user space,
the memory does not necessarily
need to be wired into the kernel
address space in order to be used.
These memory descriptors can
describe memory that is inaccessible
from the kernel directly,
but is accessible using DMA.
And this is a benefit because
wiring memory into kernel address
space is a very accessible process.
It is a very expensive operation,
and one that we hope
to avoid at all costs.
Now, user mode code that accesses
USB does in fact pass these
buffers as straight memory buffers,
just pointers,
but within the kernel the memory
descriptors are used to manipulate
them and to get the physical
address for the DMA engine.
As I said before,
with OS X it's possible to use
synchronous I/O as opposed to having
every call in the API be asynchronous.
This means that you can make
a call that will block your
thread until the call completes.
If you are writing a user land driver,
this is something that
is always safe to do.
You make a synchronous call,
your thread blocks,
and when the call completes,
your thread picks up again.
If you are running a kernel mode driver,
you must be careful that this synchronous
call does not deadlock your thread.
And there are specific guidelines to help
do that and we're learning more about
how to document that as we go along.
If you do make asynchronous calls,
then there's two methods for
continuing the processing once
your callback routine is called.
Within the kernel,
your callback routine will be called
immediately upon the completion of
the routine and your execution thread
will in fact pick up at your callback
routine once the processing is done.
It's slightly different in user mode.
There is no mechanism with Mac OS X and
with I/O Kit to make direct callbacks
from kernel run threads to user threads.
And so what happens is a Mach message
is posted on a port from the kernel side
and then there's a user thread that will
check that port using the CF run loop
technology for that callback message.
And at that point dispatch
the callback routine.
So how do drivers get matched
and loaded with Mac OS X?
Well the first thing that happens
is when a device is plugged in,
the hub driver that is controlling
the hub to which that device
is attached notices the port,
turns it on,
does typical USB enumeration things,
and creates the I/O USB device
based on the information it
finds in the device descriptor.
It then tells I/O Kit,
I have this new device,
please find a driver for it.
So first,
I/O Kit looks through its entire
table of drivers that it knows
about and it creates a pool
of drivers that are capable of
driving an I/O USB device object.
It then passes the information from
the I/O USB device object into the
USB family with the information
from the driver and it says,
"Tell me what you think about this
driver running with this device."
And the USB family does a scoring
system where the different drivers are
scored based on the criteria specified
by the USB common class specification.
This creates a ranked list and then
the I/O Kit goes through the drivers
and can call the probe method such
that any driver in the list can say,
no, I'm not interested in
controlling that device.
So this is a three level matching
system and at the end there is an
ordered list of drivers with a ranking.
The I/O Kit then takes the top
driver in that ranking and says,
okay, it's your device.
And as long as that driver
comes back and says,
I got it, it's mine, then that's it.
If the driver comes back and says, oh,
no, I changed my mind,
I'm not interested in
that device anymore,
then the next driver
in the list is tried.
So what happens when a driver,
when a USB device is removed?
You unplug it.
Well, the hub driver again notices
that the device has gone away,
and it issues a terminate message
to the IO USB device object,
which in turn sends a message
to each of its children,
including a driver and potentially
any IO USB interface objects,
which in turn send messages to
their children and so forth,
so that the leaf node of
the tree gets notified,
hey, it's time to go away.
It cleans up,
and then that propagates back up,
so that eventually the IO USB device
object cleans up and goes away.
So if your driver is the
leaf node in this process,
you get a message saying, hey,
it's time for you to stop
doing any I/O because your
parent is about to go away.
The driver then says, OK,
closes the parent,
terminates its state machine,
and I/O Kit removes
the driver from memory.
So how do drivers, if you will,
work from user space?
Apple, again,
recommends that you write your
USB driver code to work in user space.
However, you have to be aware
that user space drivers,
which are really just
Threads that run in user space and
are typically packaged as libraries,
but in one sense they function just like
applications in that the matching has to,
you know, they have to,
there's no automatic matching for them.
So these drivers do not compete
with the kernel drivers,
so if there is a user space driver
for a particular device and a kernel
mode driver for a particular device,
the kernel mode driver ends up winning
the race and controlling the device.
User space drivers can
have code that's running,
daemon code, for example,
that gets notified by I/O Kit whenever
a new USB device appears in the system.
However, once again,
this notification doesn't happen
until after the kernel drivers get
a chance to control the device.
And so, some of the things that
we've seen in the past,
and I'm not going to go into
too much detail about this,
but I'm going to go into a little
bit more detail about this,
is that the kernel mode drivers
are not the only drivers
that are running the device.
The kernel mode drivers are not the only
drivers that are running the device.
Sometimes it may be necessary to create
a dummy driver in the kernel which claims
the device so that then later on some
user land code can take over that device.
So if you are running in user code,
how do you find the device
you're interested in?
Well,
there are some I/O Kit service calls
that you use to find your device.
The first one,
here are some I/O Kit calls.
The first one, I/O Service Matching,
says I want to create a matching
dictionary that looks for any device in
the kernel whose type is I/O USB device.
Then it calls I/O Service Git matching
services and it passes in this matching
dictionary and I/O Kit returns an
iterator of all the devices that
it found that match that criteria.
Finally,
the user code can create a while loop
that looks through all the devices
of this iterator and decide which
ones it is interested in controlling,
if any.
So how do we share a device?
Well, Dave's going to talk about this.
So let's talk a little bit
about device sharing now.
The I/O Kit model for using a
particular object down in the kernel,
whether it's a USB interface
or a USB device object,
is that it's exclusive access.
Only one thing can be accessing
that particular object at a time.
The I/O USB family enforces
that by allowing only one
entity to open that at a time.
However, there are methods and mechanisms
by which tasks or threads can
cooperatively share a device.
And as we're all starting
to develop drivers and we're
getting more user mode drivers,
people are interested in how we do that.
And I want to talk a
little bit about that.
The key is a message method
that your driver provides,
whether it's a user mode
driver or a kernel mode driver.
And there are two specific
messages that are passed.
One is... . And this happens when
you have a particular device open.
One is a message that says,
"I/O message service is requesting
close." So this says that another entity
is attempting to open this device,
and it's requesting that the entity that
currently has it open please close down.
Now,
you don't have to close down at that.
You can know that you have
I/O active at the time,
and you don't want to do that.
But if you are merely
keeping the device open,
let's say in the middle of the night,
let's say in the example
that it's a modem and you're
waiting for a call to come in,
well,
the driver that's waiting for a call
to come in can go ahead and close
up because a call hasn't come in,
and another entity would like to
use it to make an outgoing call.
So you can close that,
and you can get notifications whenever
someone else closes a particular object,
a USB device or a USB interface object.
The other message that can come in while
you have the object open is the "I/O
message service is attempting open."
So this is where you can find out that
another entity is trying to open you,
but he has not requested
that you close down.
He's not requested to grab the interface.
He's just tried to open it
to see if it's available.
In general,
a shared device would want to close down
in that particular circumstance as well.
So requesting close is kind of a
more urgent request to close down,
attempting open is your clue that someone
else would like to access that device,
and you should close
it if at all possible.
Now, this sharing mechanism is really
how we intend for user mode control
panels that want to set particular
states in a device might get to that,
even though a kernel mode driver provides
most of the transport with the device.
The user mode driver would
attempt to open that thing,
that object,
and would do it with the claim flag,
we're working on the
API to get that set up,
that generates this "Services
requesting close" message,
and that's how a driver knows.
Now, this device sharing model also
works with USB in Classic.
Classic is nothing more than
a particular application that
is being a user mode driver,
okay, for one particular USB device
object down in the kernel.
Let's talk about the
Classic side for a moment,
and then we'll talk about
how Classic uses Mac OS X.
Classic presents the entire Mac OS 9.1
operating system to applications.
That includes things like USB driver.
Our entire Mac OS 9 USB stack is
living within the Classic environment.
If you have an existing Classic driver
for a vendor-specific device,
Classic can open that device object using
the user mode mechanism and can make
that device available just as though
it were plugged into an OHCI controller
directly attached to Classic.
And the USB stack will do all
of the exact same enumeration,
discover a device,
load a Classic driver exactly
the same way it does in Mac OS 9.
Right, right.
So a driver shouldn't see any
difference between how a device
behaves within Classic and how it
behaves in pure native Mac OS 9.1.
Today, Classic attempts to capture
two different kinds of devices.
The first is printer devices.
Because we have the print center inside
of Mac OS X that has a USB client and
already knows to talk to USB printing
devices for things that have 10
native imaging drivers available,
it's already available for applications
that want to print in Mac OS X.
Some applications such as
Classic wouldn't have access
to the Mac OS X print center,
so we decided to make printers
available directly within Classic.
And we just used whatever driver
was available within Classic,
whether it be the Apple USB printer
class driver that we provide,
or whether it's a vendor-specific
printer class driver,
we allow that to load and match
the same way it always does.
So within a Classic application,
you use the chooser to select which
printer it is you want to print to,
and printing works by using
the Classic USB emulation.
The other type of device that
Classic will attempt to claim and
control are vendor-specific devices.
Any vendor-specific device
that wasn't claimed by a
vendor-specific OS X native driver,
well it just defaults to going
to the Classic user mode driver.
Now, this can be a little tricky while
you're trying to develop your code,
because you might have Classic loaded,
and Classic is loaded and running so
that you can run some legacy application,
and meanwhile you're trying to
do KMOD load of specific drivers,
and Classic keeps grabbing those
devices every time you plug it in,
because it grabs vendor-specific
devices and printer devices.
Classic is migrating toward
using the sharing model,
the same one I just
talked about right here.
It's going to use and support
these exact same messages,
so it's going to play fair with
all the other user mode drivers and
all the other kernel mode drivers.
As long as we all use this sharing model,
things are going to work great.
The Apple Class drivers that we are
providing with Mac OS X is almost
the full complement of drivers that
we're providing on 9 currently.
The drivers that we are providing are
of course the Hub Class driver and
the HID Class driver for HID devices,
mice, keyboards.
We do have a new API available in
Mac OS X that we did not have in
Mac OS 9 called the HID Manager.
The HID Manager encapsulates a lot
of the same functionality that we had
within the HID library within Mac OS 9.1.
The HID library functionality is
rolled into this new HID Manager API.
The HID Manager, in addition to working
with USB HID devices,
also works with other HID devices
that might be attached to the
system and actually makes them
look like USB HID devices.
It uses USB's HID report.
It uses HID reports and HID report
descriptors as a mechanism to describe
the data that comes from a device.
So ADB mice, you know,
if Mac OS X was running
on a machine that had ADB,
an ADB mouse would actually show
up in the HID Manager just like
it were kind of a USB device with
an actual report descriptor and
reports and all of that information.
The other drivers we're providing
include the Audio Class driver.
The Audio Class driver
currently supports stereo,
input, output.
The HID driver is also
available in Mac OS X.
available in Mac OS 9.1.
Audio Class is one of the drivers
that was updated with the recent
1002 and 1003 updates included new
USB Audio Class drivers and there's
more on the way from the Audio team.
Those guys are working really hard
trying to get all the support for
all the devices that are out there.
We have a Mass Storage Class driver.
This does actually more than our
Storage Class driver in Mac OS 9 did.
The Storage Class driver in 10
supports optical media as well.
Because the Mass Storage team
has abstracted the
SCSI architecture model family,
that was one of the families that
we saw in the I/O Kit family,
it can actually support other
devices that are attached via
USB as its transport mechanism,
but actually are communicated
with SCSI commands.
The storage class guys are
working on their stuff too.
We're shy on a couple of things
that work pretty well on Mac OS 9.
Manual eject and stuff is on its way.
Communication devices.
This is the exact same support
for abstract control model modems.
You have that available in Mac OS X,
just like you did in 9.
And of course we have
printing class support.
What we had on Mac OS 9 was
printing class support for any
imaging chooser type driver.
And that included our
LaserWriter PostScript driver
for PostScript printers.
We include exactly the same functionality
on OS X and it's possible to write
new print center imaging pieces
that plug in and still use our
printing class transport mechanism.
You just have to worry about the imaging.
We'll handle that.
you get the data to the printer.
Okay, that about sums up our overview.
We have a few slides here with where
you might turn for more information.
In addition to the URLs here,
you don't need to copy those down.
They're available on a specific
page off of the apple.com website.
Places that we would point you to
include the USB Implementers Forum.
USB Implementers Forum contains
the actual specs for USB,
for the classes of drivers that
we've talked about Apple supporting.
It includes information
about upcoming classes.
I'm sure you're all familiar with
getting documentation off of there.
You can find Mac OS X developer
information on developer.apple.com/macosx
and USB information is available
on developer.apple.com/hardware/usb.
We recently posted up there
Mac OS X SDK as well as
our existing Mac OS 9 DDKs.
Some people have been
somewhat surprised that the 10
SDK doesn't have as much in it,
but actually it contains the
same type of information.
All we are really providing
is some example code and it
automatically installs in
/developer/examples I believe.
The other thing that gets installed
when you install our SDK is the
absolute latest header file.
You would need that if you're
compiling a USB project.
Now, other USB drivers,
one of the things we did in our
DDK is we separated out the actual
drivers that we used in OS 9 and
made them available as sample code.
Well,
all of the I/O USB family is available
as sample code inside the Darwin project.
So it's possible for you
to take a look at how any,
well practically all of our USB drivers
are available in Darwin and all of the
source code to the family is in Darwin.
The USB team operates out of
that Darwin repository live,
so when we check in some new
code or new fixes or new changes,
they're actually available
in Darwin almost immediately.
And you can check those out
and see what we're up to.
We love bug reports that say
in this file on that line,
that line right there is wrong.
So feel free to send those to us.
Okay, other sessions that you might
want to know about at WWDC.
Yesterday you had the I/O Kit update.
Right after this session we'll
have the I/O Kit storage drivers.
There is a session on the image
capture framework tomorrow,
tomorrow morning.
And, of course,
our USB in-depth is available
tomorrow at 3.30 p.m.
That seems wrong.
I thought it was 2 o'clock.
Anyway, it's available tomorrow
in the Civic Auditorium,
which is across the street.
Finally,
we have our feedback forum on Thursday,
an always popular event.
We're looking forward to it.
Okay,
if you want to contact somebody at Apple,
Craig Keithley, he's the guy.
He does USB and FireWire.
There's his email address.
And we have a developer mailing list
where developers help each other with
questions and answers and the USB team,
when it has time,
tries to provide a little
guidance there as well.
So it's a good way to keep track
of what's going on with USB.